## October 14th, 2024, 11:43PM 

I'm having quite a bit of trouble getting the cnpg helm chart to work. 

```bash
kubectl delete crd backups.postgresql.cnpg.io clusters.postgresql.cnpg.io poolers.postgresql.cnpg.io scheduledbackups.postgresql.cnpg.io
kubectl delete cluster --all --all-namespaces
kubectl delete deployment -n cnpg-system --all
kubectl delete service -n cnpg-system --all
kubectl get crd | grep postgresql.cnpg.io | awk '{print $1}' | xargs kubectl delete crd
kubectl delete namespace cnpg-system
```

This did something new!!

```bash
wcygan@foobar-5 ping % k get deployments --namespace cnpg-system
NAME                  READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
cnpg-cloudnative-pg   1/1     1            1           34s
wcygan@foobar-5 ping % k get pods --namespace cnpg-system     
NAME                                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
cnpg-cloudnative-pg-7b89c8f67c-kht75   1/1     Running   0          39s
```

## October 24th, 2024, 10:23PM

After `skaffold dev`, all of these work to connect to the DB:

```bash
# Connect to the primary instance
kubectl cnpg psql pg-cluster

# Connect to a replica
kubectl cnpg psql pg-cluster --replica

# Or connect as postgres superuser
kubectl exec -it pg-cluster-1 -- psql -U postgres pingdb
```

But this one doesn't work:

```bash
# Connect to the primary (in your case pg-cluster-1)
kubectl exec -it pg-cluster-1 -- psql -U pinguser pingdb
```

### Schema Management

I'm not really sure how to bootstrap the database with a table & schema...

Maybe I need to allow the microservice to manage the schema? Is this what migrations are for?

Probably we should associated the migrations for this db with the microservice that owns it by creating the migrations in the microservice's folder.

Ref: <https://cloudnative-pg.io/documentation/1.16/faq/>

#### How many databases should be hosted in a single PostgreSQL instance?

Our recommendation is to dedicate a single PostgreSQL cluster (intended as primary and multiple standby servers) to a single database, entirely managed by a single microservice application. However, by leveraging the "postgres" superuser, it is possible to create as many users and databases as desired (subject to the available resources).

The reason for this recommendation lies in the Cloud Native concept, based on microservices. In a pure microservice architecture, the microservice itself should own the data it manages exclusively. These could be flat files, queues, key-value stores, or, in our case, a PostgreSQL relational database containing both structured and unstructured data. The general idea is that only the microservice can access the database, including schema management and migrations.

Reserving a PostgreSQL instance to a single microservice owned database, enhances:

- resource management: in PostgreSQL, CPU, and memory constrained resources are generally handled at the instance level, not the database level, making it easier to integrate it with Kubernetes resource management policies at the pod level
- physical continuous backup and Point-In-Time-Recovery (PITR): given that PostgreSQL handles continuous backup and recovery at the instance level, having one database per instance simplifies PITR operations, differentiates retention policy management, and increases data protection of backups
- application updates: enable each application to decide their update policies without impacting other databases owned by different applications
- database updates: each application can decide which PostgreSQL version to use, and independently, when to upgrade to a different major version of PostgreSQL and at what conditions (e.g., cutover time)

#### Why should I use PostgreSQL?

We believe that PostgreSQL is the equivalent in the database area of what Linux represents in the operating system space. The current latest major version of Postgres is version 14, which ships out of the box:

native streaming replication, both physical and logical
continuous hot backup and point in time recovery
declarative partitioning for horizontal table partitioning, which is a very well-known technique in the database area to improve vertical scalability on a single instance
extensibility, with extensions like PostGIS for geographical databases
parallel queries for vertical scalability
JSON support, unleashing the multi-model hybrid database for both structured and unstructured data queried via standard SQL
And so on ...
